*autodeli.txt*	For Vim version 8.2	Last change: 2022 May 15

		    AUTODELI DOCUMENTATION - by Kenny Lam

	      Automatically insert and delete matching delimiters

This document describes how to use this plugin, Autodeli, the functions
defined in autodeli.vim, and when matching delimiters are completed and
deleted automatically.

Only the first section is a requisite reading. It is a short introduction on
how to use this plugin. The remaining sections are optional: they can be read
to learn about the functions that Autodeli defined or how Autodeli works.

1.  Using Autodeli		    |autodeli-use|
2.  Function list		    |autodeli-function-list|
3.  Function documentation	    |autodeli-functions|
4.  Technical details		    |autodeli-verbose|
    4.1 Definitions and Notations	|autodeli-definitions|
    4.2 Behavior			|autodeli-behavior|
    4.3 Functions			|autodeli-function-details|

==============================================================================
1.	Using Autodeli				*autodeli-use*

PRELIMINARIES

Autodeli uses Vim9 script. Thus, unless otherwise stated, all code snippets in
this document assume Vim9 script syntax.

Autodeli requires the functions supplied by klenlib to work. Obtain a copy of
klenlib at

	https://github.com/kleanse/klenlib

before attempting any of the subsequent parts in this section.

When this document uses the phrases "autocomplete delimiters" and "delimiters
completed automatically", it means that the delimiters are closed
automatically.

GETTING STARTED

To begin using Autodeli, enter the following command:

	Autodeli on

That's it. Common bracket delimiters, such as parentheses and quotes, will be
completed automatically. You may test if Autodeli is on by invoking
":Autodeli" without any arguments. Pass "help" to see the arguments the
command accepts.

DISABLING

To disable the Autodeli plugin, set "g:loaded_autodeli" in your vimrc file:

	g:loaded_autodeli = 1

Autodeli cannot be re-enabled from within Vim with this method.

To disable Autodeli only for the current buffer, enter

	Autodeli off

STARTUP BEHAVIOR

By default, Autodeli is disabled. To enable it when Vim starts, set the
variable "g:startup_autodeli" in your vimrc file:

	g:startup_autodeli = 1

This variable tells Autodeli to define its default mappings for the first
buffer opened.

==============================================================================
2.	Function list				*autodeli-function-list*

Auto-completion:
	Autocomplete_delimiters()	insert a pair of delimiters at once
	Autocomplete_quotes()		insert a pair of quotes at once if the
					given quote is entered outside a
					string
	Skip_closing()			skip a closing delimiter if no
					characters or only whitespace separate
					it and the cursor

Buffers:
	Matched()			gets the matching delimiter of the
					delimiter at the given byte index

Overload:
	Autodeli_eat()			overload a backspace character for
					Insert mode
	Autodeli_brace()		overload { for Insert mode
	Autodeli_enter()		overload <CR> for Insert mode
	Autodeli_tab()			overload <Tab> for Insert mode

==============================================================================
3.	Function documentation			*autodeli-functions*

See |autodeli-function-list| for a lexically ordered list of categories, each
of which contains functions sorted in the same fashion. Also see
|autodeli-function-details| for more comprehensive descriptions of certain
functions.

						*Autocomplete_delimiters()*
Autocomplete_delimiters({opening}: string, {closing}: string): string
	Expects: none
	Ensures: returns a string comprising characters to be interpreted by
		 the {rhs} of a mapping. This string effectively inserts
		 {opening} and {closing} simultaneously and positions the
		 cursor between them. The result is like typing three
		 characters: {opening}, then {closing}, and finally <Left>.
		 This function only works in Insert mode.

Autocomplete_quotes({quote}: string): string	*Autocomplete_quotes()*
	Expects: len({quote}) == 1
	Ensures: returns a string comprising characters to be interpreted by
		 the {rhs} of a mapping. This string performs the same as that
		 of |Autocomplete_delimiters()|, but specially handles quotes:
		 quotes are completed automatically if they are entered
		 outside a string and after a non-word character. If a quote
		 is entered when the cursor is in a string whose delimiters
		 match the quote, the string imitates |Skip_closing()| so long
		 as the quote would not be escaped. For example, where the
		 cursor is denoted by @,
			"\@"
		 entering a " here yields
			"\"@"
		 while a " in this string
			"\\@"
		 results in
			"\\"@
		 This function only works in Insert mode.

Autodeli_brace()				*Autodeli_brace()*
	Expects: none
	Ensures: returns a string comprising characters to be interpreted by
		 the {rhs} of a mapping. This string executes the behavior of
		 entering an opening brace |autodeli-function-details|. This
		 function only works in Insert mode.

Autodeli_eat({delchar}: string): string		*Autodeli_eat()*
	Expects: {delchar} is a backspacing character ("\<BS>", "\<C-U>",
		 etc.).
	Ensures: returns a string comprising characters to be interpreted by
		 the {rhs} of a mapping. This string effectively deletes a
		 pair of delimiters when both the opening and closing
		 delimiters are immediately adjacent or separated by only
		 whitespace and the opening delimiter is the character being
		 deleted. Delimiters with the same opening and closing
		 notations are supported, i.e., quotes, but only delimiters
		 with different notations can be deleted across multiple
		 lines. This function only works in Insert mode.

		 {delchar} is the backspacing character to use in the return
		 string |i_backspacing|.

		 This function works iteratively if {delchar} is CTRL-U or
		 CTRL-W: matching opening delimiters being deleted will also
		 delete their respective closing delimiters so long as no
		 characters or only whitespace separate the closing
		 delimiters. For example, if no new characters are entered and
		 'backspace' contains "start", entering CTRL-U, where the
		 cursor is denoted by @,
			(((@))) ~
		 results in
			@ ~

Autodeli_enter(): string			*Autodeli_enter()*
	Expects: none
	Ensures: returns a string comprising characters to be interpreted by
		 the {rhs} of a mapping. This string fulfills the second
		 outcome of auto-completing braces
		 |autodeli-function-details|. This function only works in
		 Insert mode.

Autodeli_tab(): string				*Autodeli_tab()*
	Expects: none
	Ensures: returns a string comprising characters to be interpreted by
		 the {rhs} of a mapping. This string effectively moves the
		 cursor past the closing delimiter of the innermost pair of
		 delimiters surrounding the cursor if no characters or only
		 whitespace separate the cursor and closing delimiter.
		 Otherwise, it inserts a <Tab>. This function only works in
		 Insert mode.

						*Matched()*
Matched({idx}: number [, {lnum}: number]): list<number>
	Expects: 0 <= {idx} < strlen(getline('.'))
		 Optional parameters:
		 1 <= {lnum} <= line('$')
		 && 0 <= {idx} < strlen(getline({lnum}))
	Ensures: returns a List containing the position of the delimiter
		 matching that found at byte index {idx} on the line indicated
		 by {lnum}. By default, {lnum} is the cursor's line number. If
		 the delimiter to consider is not a valid delimiter or no
		 matching delimiter is found, returns [0, 0].
			Index	Meaning ~
			0	line number
			1	column number

Skip_closing({closing}: string): string		*Skip_closing()*
	Expects: len({closing}) == 1 && {closing} is in the List of valid
		 closing delimiters.
	Ensures: returns a string comprising characters to be interpreted by
		 the {rhs} of a mapping. This string executes the behavior of
		 typing {closing} when the cursor is between the delimiters
		 that include {closing} |autodeli-closing-delimiter|. This
		 function only works in Insert mode.

==============================================================================
3.	Technical details			*autodeli-verbose*

This section details and describes the concepts behind this plugin's
implementations for completing delimiters automatically.

3.1 Definitions and Notations ~
				*autodeli-definitions* *autodeli-notations*
This plugin assumes the following definitions and notations.

CURSOR

Unless stated otherwise, this document denotes the cursor as '@', i.e., the at
sign.

STRINGS
						*autodeli-string*
A string is defined to be a sequence of characters delimited by either single
quotes or double quotes, where the opening quote succeeds the start of line or
a non-word character. Strings cannot be nested, and they cannot span across
multiple lines. Instances of the quote delimiting a string can be used within
the same string so long as they are escaped with backslashes. Quotes within a
string delimited by the alternative quotes have no special meaning, regardless
of whether they are escaped.

Unlike quotes, all other valid delimiters retain their special meanings in a
string with one caveat: an opening non-quote delimiter can match its closing
delimiter so long as both delimiters reside in the same string and are
unescaped.

Examples:
	( "" ) ~
	Delimiters match
	'('  ) ~
	No match: delimiters are not in the same string
	"[foo]" ~
	Delimiters match
	"\{}" ~
	No match: opening delimiter is escaped


3.2 Behavior ~
						*autodeli-behavior*
INSERTING DELIMITERS

A pair of matching delimiters eligible for autocompletion is inserted when the
opening delimiter of the pair is entered.

UNDO COMPLETION

An automatically completed pair of delimiters is not considered a separate
change; it is part of the current Insert command. Thus, undoing an
auto-completed pair undoes the entire Insert command, which is the default
behavior of Vim.

DELIMITERS IN DETAIL

The following pairs of delimiters are supported:

	()	Parentheses
	[]	Brackets
	{}	Braces
	''	Single quotes
	""	Double quotes

When are these delimiters completed automatically are discussed in turn.

Parentheses and Brackets ~

Parentheses and brackets are always completed automatically.

Quotes ~

In most cases, quotation marks are completed automatically. However, if a
quote is entered within a string or immediately after a word character, it is
not completed (assuming that the string is delimited by different quotes
|autodeli-string|): typing a ' or " inserts the respective character as
normal.

Braces ~

Braces behave like parentheses: they are always completed automatically.
However, braces have two special cases: one case regarding the <CR> character,
and the other case if '{' is entered on an empty line.

If a <CR> is entered immediately after an opening brace, the cursor begins at
one additional indent level on the new line, and the closing brace moves to
another line, indented at the same level as the line of the opening brace.
That is, entering a <CR>, where the cursor is indicated as an @

	if (condition) {@} ~

produces

	if (condition) { ~
		@ ~
	} ~

If a '{' is entered on an empty line, the above behavior occurs immediately.
So, entering '{'

	@ ~

yields

	{ ~
		@ ~
	} ~

Entering isolated opening delimiters ~
						*autodeli-no-complete*
Under this plugin, an auto-completing opening delimiter can be entered by
itself by pressing its corresponding key as normal, exiting Insert mode,
moving the cursor right, and hitting "x". That is, to enter only a '(' in
Insert mode, use the keystroke >

	(<Esc>lx

Alternatively, after the delimiter pair is inserted automatically, type
"<C-O>x".

Entering a closing delimiter or <Tab> ~
						*autodeli-closing-delimiter*
When the closing delimiter of the set of delimiters surrounding the cursor is
entered, the existing closing delimiter moves to the cursor and the cursor
advances past this delimiter. This behavior occurs so long as no characters or
only whitespace lie between the cursor and the closing delimiter. For
delimiters with different opening and closing notations, it works across
lines, e.g., entering '}'

	{ ~
		@ ~
	} ~

yields

	{ ~
		}@ ~

Entering a <Tab> in the same context as detailed above results in a similar
behavior, i.e., the cursor advances past the closing delimiter, but the
closing delimiter stays in its original position. The visible difference
between this behavior and the previous one is the whitespace between the
cursor and the closing delimiter: the former behavior preserves it, while the
latter one deletes it. Additionally, this behavior only works if the matching
delimiters are on the same line, but they need not different notations.


3.3 Functions ~
						*autodeli-function-details*
This section contains further descriptions of some of the functions listed in
|autodeli-function-list|. These functions with their accompanying descriptions
are lexically ordered. For an overview of them, see |autodeli-functions|.


Autodeli_eat() ~

This function provides quick deletion of a matching pair. If the first
non-whitespace character following the cursor is a matched closing delimiter
and the corresponding opening delimiter would normally be deleted by the given
backspacing character, the closing delimiter and whitespace between it and the
cursor are deleted as well. This function overloads <BS>, CTRL-H, CTRL-U, and
CTRL-W in Insert mode.

This function works across multiple lines. Delimiters that have the same
notation for their opening and closing versions are supported, but the
matching delimiters must be on the same line; such an intricacy is similar to
that of the behavior produced by entering a closing delimiter
|autodeli-closing-delimiter|.

Examples:

	start {@ ~

	} trailing text ~

Entering a <BS> yields

	start @ trailing text ~

With quotes, the following text

	print "@   " ~

becomes

	print @ ~

after hitting <BS>.

This function has one more intricacy: when deleting a brace pair, if the
closing brace is immediately followed by a semicolon, the semicolon is deleted
as well. For example, entering a <BS> in the following text

	struct {@}; ~

produces

	struct @ ~


Autodeli_brace() ~

Out of all the auto-completing delimiters, braces are the most special:
entering an '{' can result in one of three outcomes, listed from highest to
lowest priority:

	1. The '{' expands into three lines: first contains the opening brace;
	   second is indented by the current primary indent option
	   |C-indenting|; and third contains a closing brace indented at the
	   same level as the first so long as at least 'autoindent' is set.
	   The cursor is positioned at the end of the second line.
	2. Like the first outcome, but occurs after a subsequent <CR> is
	   entered.
	3. The '{' is auto-completed like parentheses and brackets.

The first and last outcomes occur as soon as '{' is entered; the second
outcome occurs when <CR> is entered and the cursor is surrounded by braces. Of
course, if the first outcome always triggered when '{' is entered, this second
outcome would never transpire. Therefore, the first outcome has one further
stipulation: the line must be empty or comprise only whitespace when '{' is
entered; if the line has whitespace, any whitespace after '{' is deleted, and
whitespace before '{' is preserved.

The indentation levels of the subsequent two lines in the first outcome is
governed by presiding indent option (see |C-indenting| for the option
ranking).

The second outcome typically occurs when typing <CR> after entering a '{'.
However, it actually can occur anytime a <CR> is entered between a '{' and a
'}', where '{' and '}' may be separated by whitespace. In the case where
whitespace precedes '}', whitespace between the '{' and the cursor is deleted.
Whitespace between the cursor and '}' is also usually deleted; the exception
is when neither 'autoindent', 'smartindent', 'cindent', nor 'indentexpr' is
set or nonempty. For example, with 'autoindent' set, entering a <CR>

		      whitespace
			vv vvv
	if (condition) {  @   } trailing ~

yields

	if (condition) { ~
	@ ~
	} trailing ~

Without 'autoindent', the result is

	if (condition) { ~
	@ ~
	   } trailing ~
	^^^
	whitespace

Besides the three outcomes, braces have one more automated aspect: entering an
'{' on a line that begins with the word "struct", "class", or "enum"
automatically inserts a semicolon after the brace pair.

						*autodeli-delete-empty*
For convenience, if no text is entered after the first or second outcome is
triggered, the cursor line is deleted. This behavior makes copying-pasting
text into the braces quicker.


Matched() ~

Matched() does the heavy lifting in this plugin: it checks whether the given
delimiter is matched according to the rules described in this document. Its
return value is a position, which comprises a line number and column number.

If the delimiter to consider is a quote or in a string, this function returns
the position of the matching unescaped delimiter on the same line and in the
same string. Otherwise, if it is a valid delimiter, the function returns the
position of the matching delimiter, which may reside on a different line.

To limit search time, only the lines within the current window's view are
considered. Thus, if the given delimiter actually has a matching delimiter but
it is not in view, this function misleadingly reports the delimiter as
unmatched.


 vim:tw=78:isk=!-~,^*,^\|,^\":ts=8:noet:ft=help:norl:
